



Right of Boom:
Democratizing Department of Defense Research and Development for the Twenty-First Century

ENS Dennis Devey


In the past few decades, we have witnessed the rapid democratization of technology, and with it, warfare. Advanced capabilities that previously were solely the domain of nation states have been developed, commercialized, and sold to consumers, or are freely available on the Internet. Dual-use technologies, open source software, commercial off the shelf hardware, and open source information have replaced massive investitures in military spending for many of the asymmetric threats we face today and will face in the wars of tomorrow. While massive research and development organizations were previously the only entities with the economic and human capital to build next generation weapons systems and ground breaking technology, many of the major breakthroughs being made now are happening in civilian companies around the world. The past decades have seen our technological warfighting edge erode away because our speed of adoption and adaptation is unable to match the constant changes occurring in the rest of the world.  

However, it is not the technology itself that changes the way wars are fought, but the emergent application of new technology towards war. The advent of cheap drones was obvious years in advance, but there was no toolset or standard operating procedures to defend against the use of commercial drones for reconnaissance or dropping mortar rounds. Troops on the ground were forced to adapt to this evolving threat and looked for technical solutions on the fly. When the way the enemy uses technology changes daily, the units able to develop and deploy solutions to frontline problems as they come across them will be the most able to adapt to the dynamic battlespace. To bring that vision to fulfillment, the Department of Defense must take steps to empower lower level units to solve problems as they arise, instead of being forced to wait for tools, techniques, and procedures to be issued years in the future.  In addition, a “good enough” solution developed as a response to the tactics of a non-state actor may be the starting point to counter a more advanced use of the technology by a powerful threat. The game changers cannot all be predicted, and we need to be able to respond quickly when they enter operation to defend against and counterattack. Getting “Left of Boom” on new technology is important, but it is imperative that when a “boom” inevitably occurs, we are prepared to maneuver into a position where we can reestablish fire superiority.  

The current research and development and acquisitions models, based around massive contracts, long term projects, and an aversion to risk, possess no mechanisms for truly rapid innovation. There are plenty of innovation initiatives but their goals, while admirable, are on the scale of years rather than weeks. Other than the rare internal R&D shops capable of temporarily reassigning members to a high priority project, few commands have the ability to have same month, let alone same week or same day turnarounds on capability development requests.  The bureaucratic overhead of government spending, coupled with a lack of venue to request development of these items, leaves a huge number of projects permanently on the back burner. Worse than the projects that never are initiated are the problems which have been solved in the private sector that the military still struggles with. Talking about the potential of drones, autonomous weapons, and artificial intelligence-- or artificially intelligent autonomous weaponized drones-- is an interesting exercise. However, it is significantly more productive to lay out an actionable plan that will enable the military to effectively harness the influx of technology and information that threatens our quantitative warfighting superiority. While the focus on internal innovation is well intentioned, optimizing the defense acquisition program for the speed of Twenty-First Century innovation will allow the DoD to take advantage of the fast moving world it fights in. 

	These technologies and information sources that are available to our enemies are theoretically just as open to the American military. Practically, however, our current system does not allow us the ability to leverage these resources even if they are commercially available or free. In order to address the democratization of military technology and tactics, the Department of Defense must streamline the process of capability development and defense acquisitions in order to address critical needs in a time-efficient manner, which will significantly increase the number of individual R&D tasks that can be accomplished. The DoD can make strides towards these ends with two key changes: Organizationally, we should embrace the concept of crowdsourced R&D, while structurally we should develop the marketplaces and procedures for agile development and fulfillment. By lowering the financial and human costs of innovation, the DoD will be able to keep pace and adapt quickly when a new threat or opportunity emerges. Whether the end product is an embedded system, a short piece of code, an analytic capability, or research on a new subject, getting “guaranteed win” projects done in a time and cost effective manner will provide maximum benefit to the DoD.  There will never be a lack of innovation in the global commons; the issue at hand is whether our warfighters will be empowered to fully leverage the information and technology that should be available to them. As of 2018, they are not. 

			There are fundamental shortcomings in how DoD “Innovation” operates that make the ability to solve problems within any sort of reasonable time limit impossible. First, and perhaps the most pressing, is that there are few lists of problems or proposed solutions thought up by warfighters anywhere. Within each unit there exists a long list of ideas that would provide a massive tactical advantage if there was ever a chance of them being worked on. However, these ideas are rarely formally gathered even at the lowest level, and even less frequently are a handpicked few opened up to public bidding. The DoD’s problems are interesting, meaningful, and most of the time, not that different from problems that are faced in the private sector. In many cases, the solutions have already been built and the only work required is setting up the system for the user. This leads us to the second primary issue, a lack of technical manpower who are able to work on emerging issues. Enough has been written about the military’s inability to attract and retain technical talent where it no longer requires an in depth explanation, but at a lower level, very few organizations have any sort of billeting for a team that works on small, short term problems. This lack of manpower can be supplemented by small teams from the private sector or academia, who can be given a task, work until it is complete, and then hand it back for real world evaluation by the units who requested support. The task of getting problems into the hands of people who can solve them leads us to a third shortfall; a lack of formal marketplaces optimized for rapid development. While bureaucracy is a necessary evil for massive contracts, at a small scale that same bureaucracy is guaranteed to cripple efforts. The flexibility and efficiency of current bidding processes are limited at best and focus almost entirely on large, high-cost projects with vendor lock in. The creation of a new set of marketplaces with focuses on low cost, high speed, and modular contracting principles would create avenues for fulfillment that currently do not exist, greatly increase the speed at which new tools could be deployed.

			The benefits described in this essay are not theoretical: there is nothing new about the innovation insurgency inside the Department of Defense who have worked inside and outside the bureaucracy on a daily basis for decades. Some groups, like Hacking for Defense and the SOFWERX family have made admirable attempts at bringing this general idea of rapid innovation to a national level, however both are limited in their ability to scale towards real world relevance and their vision of “rapid” is a six month turnaround. There are much smaller groups, operating on a shoestring budget or even in their spare time that are able to provide on demand capability development, but are limited by a lack of formal funding and size.  Applying the same lessons and principles these small groups have learned over the years, the creation of open marketplaces will bring these problems outside of limited ecosystems to the rest of the United States. This new system would greatly benefit small businesses that are currently unable to compete with the larger corporations which win the lion’s share of the current contracts. This would also open up the system to students and professors who could work on small projects for research credits or advanced degrees, giving the DoD easy access to a previously untapped wellspring of talent. Finally, and perhaps most critically, there are a large number of patriotic technologists who would jump at the opportunity to serve their country by attacking the DoD’s interesting problems with the expertise gained at their day jobs around the country. 

The constant stream of technological advances and new applications of technology that disrupted the modern world shows no sign of slowing down. As the rate of change increased for the rest of the world, the Department of Defense has been hamstrung by a focus on developing the weapons of the future rather than the tools of the present.  Without the necessary bureaucratic framework and marketplaces optimized for short term capability development, we will be unable to get our warfighters’ problems in the hands of technologists who can solve them. Ultimately, unless we can streamline the process by which we acquire, develop and integrate emergent and disruptive technologies into the way we fight, the relentless democratization of innovation will continue to erode the advantage that the United States currently enjoys on land, on sea, in the air and in cyberspace. 




